[MUSIC PLAYING]
There are some great questions
that have intrigued and
haunted us since the
dawn of humanity.
What is out there?
How did we get here?
What is the world made of?
The story of our search to
answer these questions is the
story of science.
Of all human endeavors, science
has had the greatest
impact on our lives, on
how we see the world,
on how we see ourselves.
Its ideas, its achievements, its
results are all around us.
But the story of science has
been shaped as much by what's
outside the laboratory
as inside.
Power and passion, rivalry and
sheer chance have all played
significant roles.
This is the story of how history
made science, and how
science made history.
This time an ancient
human ambition.
The search for limitless
power.
We are the most power-hungry
generation
that has ever lived.
Energy is the heartbeat
of our civilization.
The quest to discover what power
can do and what power
actually is forms
the foundation
of the modern world.
Together these simple aims
have led to some of the
greatest insights in the
history of science.
The 17th century was a pivotal
age when the balance between
man and nature began
to change forever.
There was of course
no electricity.
There were no cars, no trains.
The most common power sources
had to be fed and watered.
Horsepower meant just that.
But a remote beach in Holland
was the setting for a glimpse
of what was to come.
400 years ago you might have
been surprised to see a much
larger version of one
of these fly past.
It was 8 meters long
and 4 meters wide.
It had wheels with a diameter
of 2 meters.
It was the ancestor of the
modern land yachts
[? Flor Lagaway ?]
sails today.
It was called the
wind chariot.
Designed to carry heavily armed
soldiers along the coastline.
It amazed and terrified
in equal measure.
Here was the power of the wind
being harnessed to produce
motion on land.
These yachts was the fastest
thing ever made by man.
And to give you an impression,
it outplays a running horse.
The wind chariot was designed
by an engineer and
mathematician called Simon
Stevin, a man who would
literally change the face of
Holland and help turn it into
a great trading empire.
Simon Stevin developed
something really
unique 409 years ago.
Amazing.
But Stevin's ambitions for
window power went far beyond
just chariots.
He wanted to change his country
by harnessing the
power of the wind as
no one had before.
And his tool was to
be mathematics.
Mathematics was changing.
For 100's of years in the
universities geometry and
arithmetic had been important
theoretical pursuits.
Practical applications, like
building bridges and firing
cannons, were limited.
But now men like Simon Stevin
would use math's theory to
create something much
bigger, a new
mathematically grounded science.
And that would help them solve
a whole range of complex
problems.
The problem Stevin turned his
mathematics to was a crucial
one in low-lying Holland, how
to keep the country dry.
Professor Gerard van Bussel
has studied his work.
Simon Stevin did not only
perform mathematics, so they
say, but he wanted to
see how he could use
that to improve machines.
For over a century Holland's
windmills have been scooping
water from drainage ditches,
tipping it into the canals to
carry it away.
Stevin was convinced that
mathematics could make
windmills much more efficient.
But it was a complex
undertaking.
The difficulty is, this is not
a perpendicular gearing.
But this wheel is slightly
tilted, something like 13
degrees and so on.
And that makes the movement of
these teeth inside these stays
very complex.
It's not only rotating, but also
moving up and downwards
and moving inwards
and outwards.
Stevin would have to account for
every one of those angles
and movements.
From the sails to the
shaft to the cogs.
It was a mathematical
minefield.
To improve the efficiency of the
windmill, his calculations
would require a completely
new approach.
Really a kind of
three-dimensional mathematics
that you need to
be able to do.
Before Stevin no one
could do that.
Stevin designed new cogs,
paddle wheel shapes, and
sluices, even a chain of
windmills that could be used
to drain not just fields,
but a lake.
His modifications were so
effective, this new
mathematically designed windmill
was three times more
efficient than the
ones it replaced.
What's more, Stevin patented his
many inventions to ensure
that his work would
be well-rewarded.
Mathematics made Stevin rich.
And it wasn't long before
it started to
change the whole country.
Holland would use that you
wouldn't be able to help them
develop into an industrial
powerhouse.
Seeds and nuts were ground to
extract their valuable oil.
Paper mills became mechanized.
Wood could be cut 30 times
faster and with greater
precision than by hand.
Helping to turn this small
country into the biggest
shipbuilders in western
Europe.
To the sound of mathematically
designed mills whirring in the
wind, Holland became a dynamic
trading nation and Amsterdam
one of the richest and most
cosmopolitan cities on Earth.
The economic growth of
Holland changed the
power map of Europe.
It had been helped by advances
in windmill design, a new
mathematically based science.
And a belief amongst men like
Simon Stevin that science
should be useful.
It was obvious what
power could do.
What was still missing was any
scientific understanding of
what power actually is.
That would only begin to emerge
far later on the other
side of the English Channel.
The English country house of the
18th century was a place
of intrigue, romance and gossip,
but was also host to
the occasional visiting
experimenter.
An unlikely combination that
would mark the birth of a
world-changing new
source of power.
Science had become popular
entertainment
for the drawing room.
Contraptions developed as real
scientific experiments dazzled
and amazed.
Those looking on
were stunned by
phenomena like static charge.
And silenced by the baffling
qualities of the vacuum.
An alarm was placed in a vacuum
jar and set to go off.
The air was pumped out.
And when the alarm rang,
nothing could be heard.
No one really had a satisfactory
scientific
explanation for these things.
But the spectacle helped
bring new ideas to a
new attentive audience.
And to one ambitious
entrepreneur in particular.
Matthew Boulton was a
manufacturer who belonged to a
group called the Lunar Society,
so-called because
they met on the night
of the full moon.
The Lunar Society brought
together industrialists,
experimenters, and natural
philosophers, who all shared a
love of practical knowledge.
Through the Lunar Society,
Matthew Boulton met the
Scottish inventor and
engineer James Watt.
For some years Watt had
been working with
prototype steam engines.
This prompted Boulton to invite
him to take part in a
joint business venture.
Together they would form one
of the most powerful
relationships of the
18th century.
And the steam engine they
produced would transform not
just technology, but
science itself.
This is an original Boulton and
Watt steam engine with all
the expected elements, a man,
some coal, and a furnace.
What might be less expected is
that it is stationary, and it
is vast. So vast that this
engine, originally built to
keep the nearby canal topped
up with water, occupies the
entire building and boasts
its very own driver.
Today Harry Willis is
at the controls.
We call this the driving
platform.
These are the levers that
control the valves that
control the passage of steam
through the engine.
This is the steam throttle.
Basically, you turn it that
way to reduce the steam.
And you turn it that way
to increase the steam.
But the driving force of Boulton
and Watt's engine is
not the power of
steam directly.
Rather an industrial version of
that country house trick,
the vacuum.
The steam is injected into the
cylinder then quickly cooled,
creating a vacuum.
This drags the piston head down
providing the engine with
its lifting power.
It's a process this machine is
still able to perform after
nearly 200 years.
This engine began to
work here in 1812.
Put that in context, it's the
year that Napoleon retreated
from Moscow, and you're seeing
it today actually doing the
job that it was installed
to do.
The modern pumps that normally
maintain the canal are
switched off.
And they're actually now
maintaining the canal.
Just bear with me.
Just let me get this
going again.
As you see, you can't keep
your eye off it.
James Watt didn't invent the
steam engine or even the idea
of using a vacuum
to pump water.
Engines had been powered in
this way for decades.
Watt's fame and that of his
machine rests on one small
modification located
here, right at the
bottom of the engine.
James Watt's key invention was
that of a separate condenser.
He did the condensing action of
the steam in a tank of cold
water down here, separate
from the main cylinder.
By cooling the steam in a
separate condenser, the
all-important vacuum could be
created well away from the hot
cylinders, a small but ingenious
technical innovation
with enormous benefits.
The more efficient the engine,
the less coal you use for 100
gallons of water
that you pump.
Previous engines would've used
four times the amount of coal.
Being four times more efficient,
the potential
savings from using a Boulton and
Watt engine were enormous,
something any business
man could understand.
The success of Boulton and
Watt's engine was not just due
to new technology, but also a
clever piece of financial
engineering.
They had a patent on
their engines.
They charged a royalty on the
amount of coal saved by each
of their engines.
And it is also said that they
charged a royalty on every
stroke that the engine made.
By having a patent, Boulton and
Watt made money not just
by selling their engines, but
by charging the owners a
royalty to use them.
In our search for power,
the smell of money
is rarely far away.
But for all the riches on
offer, there was little
scientific theory behind the
Boulton and Watt engine.
There was still no real
explanation to what energy
actually was.
The science would have to wait
until steam power became a
force throughout the land.
The big demand for steam
engines was in the west
country, pumping flood
water from mines.
And the mine owners soon became
dependent on Boulton
and Watt's more efficient
machines.
Many quickly became
fed up with having
to pay annual royalties.
In an attempt to avoid Boulton
and Watt's patent, some
Cornish engineers began to build
their own steam engines.
One notable steam maverick
was Richard Trevithick.
He would take steam power in
an entirely new direction.
With this, the puffing devil,
all eight horsepower of it.
Unlike Boulton and Watt's
engine, it moved.
Trevithick's genius was that he
built high-pressure steam
engines where the steam
drives the pistons.
Trevithick could see that
high-pressure would be more
efficient, save coal, save
money, good idea.
He didn't need vacuums
or condensers.
And instead of being the size
of houses, his steam engines
were small, powerful, mobile.
And as an added bonus,
Trevithick's engine was one of
the first to produce the
familiar sound of
high-pressure steam escaping.
This new steam engine clearly
pointed to a better way of
moving goods and
people around.
Yet Trevithick has not gone down
in history as the father
of the modern
He was working at an ironworks,
and there was a
horse drawn tramway, which
took the steel
down to a local canal.
And he said, you can
put a steam engine
on here, far better.
So we built the steam engine,
and he demonstrated it would
pull 10 tons.
But there was a problem,
and it wasn't
with the puffing devil.
The rails were cast iron, short
lengths of cast iron.
And with the weight
on them, they just
cracked under the strain.
And so rather ironically, the
tram road went back to horse
[? holding ?]
again.
The history of science is full
of moments like this.
Great ideas need to happen
in the right place
at the right time.
Trevithick wasn't a good
businessman, so he wasn't a
self-publicist. Had he found
someone that would've linked
up with him, I think it would
have made a huge difference.
Unfortunately Trevithick never
found his own Matthew Boulton,
someone to invest in his
ideas and make money.
Richard Trevithick was simply
in the wrong place at the
wrong time.
Steam engines would have an
enormous global impact.
They were born out
to a combination
of different forces.
The Lunar Society, where men
of science could meet and
exchange ideas.
Technical innovations like
high-pressure steam.
The promise of money and
protection of patents.
From all this emerged
a previously
unimaginable source of power.
The mechanical equivalent of
countless horses to work the
factories and mills of the
19th century landscape.
The steam engines, their
profits, their owners gave
political power to a new group
of people, the middle classes.
These were the forces now
shaping Victorian Britain.
The quest for power had produced
much, but still with
no more scientific understanding
that had existed
a century before.
Only now, belatedly, came the
theorists drawing on a
surprising source
of inspiration.
Victorian society was obsessed
with efficiency.
Waste was not just uneconomical,
it was also
un-Christian.
Nowhere was this more true
than in the kitchen.
At the end of a meal,
food wasn't thrown
away, it was recycled.
Publications like Mrs. Beeton's
Book of Household
Management contained numerous
recipes for
using valuable leftovers.
Old bones to make soup.
Old bread to make a pudding.
But it wasn't only
at home that the
Victorians were efficient.
Science sought efficiency too.
Their attitude towards life
was also related to their
attitude towards machines.
If the machine was efficient
and economic, it
wasn't being wasteful.
You were using it to its best
possible advantage.
As the steam engine took off it
became important to compare
which engines were
more efficient.
A new theory of energy would
help make precisely that sort
of judgment.
Because in the early 19th
century, no one really knew
what energy actually was.
What was becoming increasingly
clear was that energy in
different forms was
interchangeable.
It could be transferred.
This interchangeability of
energy was very, very
fundamental to the science
at the second
half of the 19th century.
For the first time such diverse
things as burning
coals, boiling water, and the
production of steam could be
united by a single concept,
that of energy.
The chemical energy of
the coal was turned
into heat as it burns.
This energy heats the kettle
and the water inside, which
then turns into steam.
Steam, which can then be
used to perform work.
This was a turning
point in science.
All the research into steam
engines culminated in two of
the most important
laws of physics.
And they're called the two
laws of thermodynamics.
The first law of thermodynamics
is a
mathematical description
of energy known as
conservation of energy.
It simply states that
energy cannot
be created or destroyed.
So you can never get more energy
out than is contained
in the fuel you put in.
The second law states
that no machine can
ever be 100% efficient.
Together they apply to every
source of power from kettles
to steam engines to windmills.
Everything.
Thermodynamics was one of the
crowning achievements of 19th
century science.
Inspired in part by the desire
to explain the technological
wonder of the age, the steam
engine, and by an obsession
with thrift and efficiency.
But thermodynamics was only one
part of what was to be a
much more comprehensive theory
of energy and power.
In June 1772 a small sailing
expedition set off for the
coast of France on a voyage that
would help point science
towards the modern age.
Its leader was John Walsh,
recently retired from the
British East India Company.
Walsh was fascinated by the
electricity found in nature.
He went looking for it
not in the skies, but
underwater in a fish.
The torpedo fish.
It could create electric shocks
at will and use them to
catch its prey.
Walsh wanted to find out whether
the power emitted by
this strange fish was
the same as that
given off by lightning.
Or a spark generator.
Some of the fish John Walsh
brought back are still
preserved at the Hunterian
Museum in London.
They were dissected by the
renowned surgeon John Hunter
to reveal some highly
peculiar organs.
What we have here is a section
through the body of a torpedo.
Here's the top.
Here's the bottom.
This is the front of the fish,
and a slice has been cut
through to the body.
I think it was fairly obvious to
him what was unusual about
the torpedo.
These two very distinctive
organs, one on each side of
the body, that must be connected
this ability to
deliver these shocks.
This slice is taken down the
length of the body through one
of the pectoral fins, and it
shows in detail the structure
of those electric organs.
But also Hunter's worked a bit
of magic on it by injecting it
with a red dye to show where
the blood vessels are.
The electrical charge seemed to
come from these tiny cells
now known as electrocytes.
The way in which the torpedo
generates the charge is
through having a series of
electrocytes stacked up within
the electric organs and
together, these allow the fish
to generate an electric shock.
John Walsh was convinced that
the electricity from the
torpedo fish was not only the
same as the electricity from
lightening, but that it must
also be possible to generate
it using a machine.
But plenty of people didn't
agree with Walsh.
It seemed almost sacrilegious to
claim that electricity from
a machine made by man was the
same as electricity from a
fish, which had been
created by God.
And yet proof that this was
indeed the case was just
around the corner.
In the archives of the Royal
Society in London sits a
letter that dates
back to 1800.
Written by the Italian scientist
Alessandro Volta, it
essentially contains
instructions on how to build
your own torpedo fish.
This is the letter, a facsimile
of the letter from
Volta to the Royal Society
containing all the
instructions together with
a handy diagram.
And everything I need
is in this box.
Some plates of zine, plates
of copper, and some pads
impregnated with liquid.
Volta said you could carry on
building these piles as high
as you liked until they
became unstable.
And I think we'll finish
ours there.
It does look a bit like the
electric organ in the torpedo.
And it's certain that's what
Volta had in mind when he
referred to this as an
artificial electric organ.
The Voltaic pile, as it became
known, could generate a
significant electric current.
Volta couldn't measure it, but
he could demonstrate that it
delivered a shock just like
the torpedo fish.
To an audience in the 18th
century, the idea that this
could produce a current must
have come as quite a surprise.
In building his pile, Volta had
created something really
exceptional.
A device that could produce
a constant current of the
electricity rather than just
a single discharge.
He had in fact invented what
we now know as the battery.
But for a long time, people had
no idea what to do with
the battery.
There was no obvious practical
application.
There was nothing
to plug it into.
It would be a generation before
somebody managed to
find a significant
practical use.
Outside the world of science,
the political map of the world
was changing.
European empires searched out
new lands to control.
Ships full of raw materials and
manufactured goods plied
the oceans.
If information could be moved
around this increasingly
connected world and moved fast,
it would be of great
benefit to empire builders
and traders alike.
Volta's pile was about to get
plugged into something useful.
And this time it was science
that led the way.
Thanks to a man called Hans
Christian Orsted.
The story is that Hans Orsted
just happened to be playing
around his apparatus, thinking
of something exciting to show
his students.
He had a compass, an electric
pile, and he
had an electric wire.
When Orsted connected everything
together, something
unexpected happened.
When he put the current on,
the needle twitched.
When he took it off, the
needle twitched again.
Somehow the electrical current
in the wire was acting like a
magnet and making
the needle move.
It doesn't seem like a very
significant set of apparatus.
But within a few years after
Orsted made that initial
discovery, the world was
literally transformed.
That small twitching compass
needle rapidly grew into the
electric telegraph.
The power of electricity could
now be used to send and
receive messages almost
instantaneously.
Telegraph cables were
soon running
right across the globe.
Alongside the era's other great
invention, steam, the
combination was unstoppable.
Steam power did the heavy work,
draining mines, spinning
cotton, and powering a
new railway network.
And with the telegraph, the
battery brought control both
political and financial.
Together they helped build
the empires of
19th century Europe.
But the telegraph also
marked the start of a
new ambition in science.
When Orsted linked together
electricity and magnetism,
that was the first step in
moving towards a grand union
of all the forces of nature.
Electromagnetism was one of the
greatest achievements of
the 19th century.
It would go on to explain the
very nature of light, of radio
waves, even X-rays helping
persuade 19th century physics
that it had discovered all the
fundamental laws of nature.
As it turned out, this cozy
assumption was somewhat wide
of the mark.
At the turn of the 20th century,
the discovery of a
brand new element was splashed
across front pages
all over the world.
Called radium, it was the
biggest news in science.
One reason for all the
excitement was
the way radium behaved.
It spontaneously glowed in the
dark, and created ghostly
patterns on photographic
plates.
It seemed to be creating
energy out of nowhere.
Radium and its mysterious
properties caught the public
imagination helping to sell
a huge range of consumer
products, which is surprising
since radium is radioactive.
The most famous of these
products, the Revigator.
Over half a million of these
sold in the United States in
the 1920's.
Water jar line with
radioactive ore.
The consumer would fill it up
with water, and the following
day, the water would be charged
with radioactivity.
These are certainly
radioactive.
So great was the hype
surrounding radium that small
amounts of it were even
put into toothpaste,
healing pads, tiny toys.
Just the name radium was
a strong selling point.
The name radium had
a real cache.
It indicated something
of value,
something of high quality.
And so manufacturers
loved to use that
name with their products.
With the radium beer, radium
condoms, and radium
cigarettes, you're ready for
a fun night on the town.
The scientists responsible for
first isolating radium were
Marie Curie and her
husband Pierre.
It didn't take them long
to recognize its
extraordinary potential.
Just one gram contained enough
energy to turn a ton of
freezing water into steam.
While one ton of radium could do
the work of a million and a
half tons of coal.
The problem facing the
scientists was that all this
seemed to completely
go against the
known laws of physics.
The first law of thermodynamics
stated that
energy cannot be created
or destroyed.
But these radioactive substances
seemed to be
pouring out unlimited
amounts of energy.
So where was this energy
coming from?
The Curies favorite view was
that radioactive materials,
such as radium, had this unique
ability to extract
energy from their surroundings
and then release it in the
form of radiation.
As radioactive substances were
studied more closely,
something peculiar
was noticed.
They gradually transform or
decay into something else.
Radium eventually
becomes lead.
What scientists realized was
that as these substances emit
energy, they also lose mass.
The energy wasn't being
extracted from the air.
It wasn't being extracted
from the ether.
The energy was found
in the mass.
The link between energy and mass
was eventually explained
by Albert Einstein's
famous equation.
Energy equals mass times the
square of the speed of light.
E=mc2 points out that the mass
of the atom, the mass inside
the nucleus was in fact was
the energy itself, and the
decay simply transformed
that mass into energy.
Scientists had successfully
explained heat and movement in
terms of energy.
Now energy, which hadn't even
existed as a concept 50 years
earlier, was being used
to explain the
nature of matter itself.
In fact there was nothing that
couldn't now be explained in
terms of energy.
Not just steam engines and
windmills, but living things.
Stars, even galaxies,
all were governed
by the laws of energy.
In its quest to understand what
power is, science had
uncovered secrets which
lay at the very
heart of the universe.
The theory encapsulated in E=mc2
would eventually lead to
nuclear energy and
the atomic bomb.
But the consequences of that
belong to a different story.
Instead to complete the story
of power, we need to go back
to the turn of the
20th century.
Back then, the scientific theory
of energy might have
been lighting up men's minds,
but it wasn't lighting up
anyone's homes.
Not yet, at any rate.
Most people's domestic lives
were largely unaffected by
developments in thermodynamics
or electromagnetism.
Outside there were telegraphs
and steam trains, but at home
there were gas lamps, candles,
and open fires.
What changed our personal
relationship with power was
the discovery that the link
between electricity and
magnetism worked both ways.
Orsted had shown that an
electrical current could act
just like a magnet.
The British scientist Michael
Faraday was the first to
demonstrate the opposite with
electromagnetic induction.
I've got a magnet.
I've got a coil of copper wire
going round and round.
And what I'm going to do is make
the magnet move through
the middle of the coil.
As I move the magnet up and
down through the wire, the
electric light flashes
on and off.
Faraday realized if you have
the movement of the magnets
through the coil, then you
can use that to generate
electricity.
And then you can use the
electricity to power machines.
This was a revolutionary
discovery.
In theory if the magnet could be
moved fast enough, it would
produce an electric current
that was continuous.
What was needed was something
to move the magnet.
Something like this.
Niagara Falls.
One of the most powerful
waterfalls in the world.
The challenge lay in finding a
way of converting this massive
energy into an altogether
more useful form.
Electromagnetic conduction
offered the promise of
harnessing the power of the
falls to produce electricity.
But it would require
a colossal feat of
engineering to do it.
The project began deep
underground.
Tunnels were dug into solid rock
by hand to divert some of
those water to an electrical
generator.
Those taking part sensed it
was the dawn of a new age.
When completed, this power
station was described as a
feat to rival the pyramids, the
temples of the Greeks, and
the great cathedrals
of Europe.
A monument to the
scientific age.
These giant turbines are the
ultimate expression both of
what power is and
what power does.
Huge magnets turned by the
power of falling water,
creating enough electricity
to power 3/4 of a million
lightbulbs.
But for electricity to become
a commodity, something that
could be bought and sold,
there was one
final barrier to overcome.
How to get it from Niagara to
places where it could be sold?
Existing power sources could
comfortably transport
electricity over short
distances.
But as it traveled further, the
electricity's power would
quickly diminish.
After as little as 2 miles,
virtually no current will be
getting through at all.
Here at Niagara, this problem
was overcome.
Its generators produced what's
known as alternating current
at high voltage and low power
loss, which meant electricity
could travel long distances.
In November 1896, power from
the falls were switched on.
For the first time, electricity
traveled from
Niagara to Buffalo, more
than 20 miles away.
In that fleeting moment was
born the electric age.
The quest to discover what
power can do has
transformed our lives.
It set us on a relentless search
for new sources of
energy from deep within the
Earth or inside the smallest
atom to the sun itself, our
hunger for more power knows
few bounds.
Small wonder that our planet,
alone in the solar system,
glows in the dark.
But the quest to know what power
is has had an equally
profound effect.
Using the language of
mathematics, energy has been
revealed as a fundamental
component of the universe.
But the theoretical
understanding of energy is, in
no small part, built on the
earlier contributions of more
practically minded men.
The whole of modern physics, in
a way, rests on all those
industrial innovations that were
being made in the 19th
century and which led to this
new concept of energy.
The joint understanding of what
power can do, and what
power actually is, has become
one of the driving forces of
humanity and human exploration
and underpins
the modem world today.